# Indentation & Readability

- indented code is easier to read + debug
- software is collaborative

### Install Extensions (VSCode marketplace)

- indent-rainbow
- prettier
- rainbow-brackets

# HTML - Hypertext Markup Language

- the world's first website, 1991: http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/WWW/TheProject.html
- html was originally created as a markup language to describe scientific documents in the early internet
- as the internet grew, people wanted to share OTHER things, and the web suddenly had to look nice...
  - here's a website from 1996: https://www.spacejam.com/jam.htm
  - observe the HTML: you'll notice tables... HTML is unrecognizable from then.
- <html><head></head><body></body>
- <head> contains metadata: <title>, link to your CSS stylesheet, links to custom fonts, iconsets, language [not visible on browser]
- <body>: visible on browser
  - intro to HTML5 - semantic HTML
   - semantic tags: describe meaning of content in a human or machine-readable way.
   - "machine-readable": screen-readers
    - A screen reader is a software application that interprets things on the screen (text, images, links, and so on) and converts these to a format that visually impaired people are able to consume and interact with.
  - header, nav, section, article, aside, footer
    - <header>
    - <nav> contains navigation links
    - <section> groups distinct sections of content or functionality
    - <article> is for containing related individual standalone pieces of content, such as individual blog posts, videos, images or news items.
    - aside: can be used to create a sidenav, or displaying less important content
    - <footer> contains footnotes, can act as a secondary nav*

  - personal experience: HTML comes with default styles that can be hard to override sometimes so we use divs, and spans because they're like containers. They have no styles. It's also because... the importance of HTML5 is woefully understated.

# HTML5 is imp for accessiblity!

- a11y = "a", followed by 11 characters, "y"
- if you design or code for accessibility, you are an a11y
- "The Web is fundamentally designed to work for all people, whatever their hardware, software, language, location, or ability." - Tim Berners Lee, inventor of the World Wide Web.
- He wrote the first web client and server in 1990. His specifications of URIs, HTTP and HTML were refined as web technology spread.
- HTML has come a long way! HTML5\* (2008) has out of the box accessibility features. What does that mean? When you create HTML docs with semantic tags, they are readable by screenreader and useable by keyboard only (among other things)
- accessibility is the difference between someone being able to participate or being completely excluded.

# Video Debrief

- video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3f31oufqFSM
- accessibility is treated as a nice-to-have, afterthought in most companies (it can be expensive but in most cases, we don't know enough and we don't have the training)
- why is that a problem: 1) disability is common, 2) business case for accessibility, 3) you may end up in court
  - widening our understanding of disability
  - you will lose money!
  - Beyonce was sued last year because her website did not provide accomodation for people with significant vision impairments.
    - "The lawsuit—filed today by New York woman Mary Conner, who is blind—argues that the website violates the Americans with Disabilities Act by being “an exclusively visual interface” without any coded alt-text behind the images."
    - “Plaintiff dreams of attending a Beyoncé concert and listening to her music in a live setting,” Conner’s attorney writes in the complaint. “However, when she browsed the Beyonce.com website, she encountered numerous barriers which limited her accessibility to the goods and services offered on the website.” The lawsuit also cites a lack of accessible drop-down menus and the inability to use a keyboard instead of a mouse."
    - 2 million people were unable to access Beyonce.com. https://fortune.com/2019/09/21/beyonce-lawsuit-website-ada-compliant/

# WGA

- you don't have to remember it all! Documentation exists.
- General Rule: We aren't using an all-or-nothing approach with accessiblity. Every change you make is one step forward in the right direction.
- CAPTCHA: test created by Carnegie Mellon to prevent web bots from using their site
  - ex. select the images that have a bridge in it
- "For example, asking users who are blind, visually impaired or dyslexic to identify textual characters in a distorted graphic is asking them to perform a task they are intrinsically least able to accomplish. Similarly, asking users who are deaf, hard of hearing, or living with auditory processing disorder to identify and transcribe in writing the content of an audio CAPTCHA is asking them to perform a task they’re intrinsically least likely to accomplish."
- "In essence, such CAPTCHAs fail to properly recognize users with disabilities as human, obstructing their participation in contemporary society."
- "A CAPTCHA without an accessible and usable alternative makes it impossible for users with certain disabilities to create accounts, write comments, or make purchases on such sites."

# HTML5 - Accessibility Out of the Box

- general rule: use the correct HTML elements for their intended purpose, common example: using button tags over divs.
- HTML elements have default styles.
  - from my limited interaction with accessibility designers, this is where most inaccessible use of html begins.
  - override exists!
  - aside: how can we know what a default style is? if you haven't used CSS to style, it's a default style
  - default: "users can navigate between buttons using the Tab key and activate their selection using Return or Enter"
  - great for people using keyboards for navigating
- Using Semantic HTML: accessiblity built in, better on mobile, and good for SEO.

# ARIA

- use aria by adding attributes to our HTML code
- no impact on display or behave
- acts as a descriptive layer for screenreaders

- "For many people, technology makes things easier. For people with disabilities, technology makes things possible." -- MDN
