# Introduction to CSS

- 10 minute review

  - Last class, we talked about HTML5. Or: Semantic HTML.
  - We looked at the world's first website: http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/WWW/TheProject.html
  - It's all HTML. I used the inspector last class but I did not show you how to access it or it's importance.
  - The inspector shows us the DOM - also known as the Document Object Model. When our HTML is loaded into the browser, we can right click & open inspector.
  - This is a nifty tool when doing frontend work.
  - Let's recap our weather code by reviewing HTML structure in the inspector.
  - Notice, when I copy the path, my HTML, that currently exists in vscode, becomes available on the browser.
  - HTML structure consists of: <head> and <body>
    - <head> consists of metadata like language, viewport, title and links to our stylesheet. Without our style sheet, our HTML is plain and has basic (and quite ugly) default styles.
    - <body> consists of everything else - this means, our <main>, <nav>, <aside>, <section>, <footer>
      - recall downloading extensions in the VS code marketplace that indent upon saving. That makes our code readable.
    - There are one special HTML tags that I want to discuss today: It's the <link> tag
    - <link> will become important for adding hyperlinks to our page in the <body>
    - but most importantly, it'll be very important for linking our stylesheet.
    - you can style your HTML within your HTML file, using a <style> tag

  # Intro to CSS - Cascading Style Sheets

  - Without CSS, our webpages run from top to bottom, left-aligned.
  - Let's view a website... on my browser, I'm going to show you a couple of websites...
    - view > page style > no style (this disables CSS)
  - CSS is powerful.
    - commonly known: font, colors,
    - unknown: scroll, animate, we create shapes/grids, dark mode, truncate text, responsive design
  - CSS interacts with HTML elements
  - syntax
    - element {}; the end of which requires a semicolon.
    - html . class
    - html # id
  - "cascading" can be anecdotally thought of as "fighting" style sheets. For example: if you had 2 stylesheets targetting the same element, they would fight one another. Which rule would apply?
    - the fact they are in conflict is not a problem, it's just how the language was designed.
    - there is an order of precedence in CSS.
    - style id class type
    - !important wins but it is bad practice
  - important: CSS can occur in our HTML file w/ <style>, located in <head> but common practice is to use a external stylesheet

  HTML/CSS interaction

  - CSS assumes a box around each HTML element (margin, padding)
  - display: block, display: inline, display: inline-block
    - "something you'll come to remember is that certain HTML elements have default styles + default layouts"
      - <p> display block, <span> displays inline, <div> displays block
  - using flexbox!

  REAL WORLD

  - library's - material, bootstrap
  - design system: ex. Polaris https://polaris.shopify.com/
